CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to Firestartr Documentation

This guide explains how to contribute to the Firestartr documentation and test your changes locally.

## Documentation Structure

The documentation is organized as follows:

```
docs/
├── site/
│   ├── raw/                    # SOURCE - Generated from other repositories
│   │   ├── core/               # Core Firestartr documentation
│   │   │   ├── docs/           # Documentation markdown files
│   │   │   ├── crds/           # Custom Resource Definitions (versioned)
│   │   │   └── claims/         # Claims JSON schema
│   │   └── features/           # Individual feature documentation
│   └── web/                    # Hugo static site
│       ├── content/            # Check artifacts from GitHub Actions
│       ├── static/             # Check artifacts from GitHub Actions
│       ├── themes/             # Hugo Book theme (git submodule)
│       └── hugo.toml           # Hugo configuration
└── .github/workflows/
    └── deploy-docs.yml         # Automated deployment workflow
```

## Editing Documentation

### Where to Edit

**Always edit files in `site/raw/`** - never edit files in `site/web/content/` as they are auto-generated.

- **Core documentation**: Edit files in `site/raw/core/docs/`
- **Feature documentation**: Edit files in `site/raw/features/<feature-name>/`

### Documentation Workflow

1. Edit source files in `site/raw/`
2. Migrate content locally (see steps below)
3. Test with Hugo local server
4. Commit and push to main branch
5. GitHub Actions automatically migrates, builds, and deploys

## Testing Documentation Locally

### Prerequisites

Install Hugo extended version:

```bash
# macOS (Homebrew)
brew install hugo

# Linux (Snap)
snap install hugo

# Or download from https://github.com/gohugoio/hugo/releases
```

Verify installation:

```bash
hugo version
# Should show v0.152.2 or later with "extended"
```

### Initialize Git Submodules

The Hugo Book theme is included as a git submodule. Initialize it:

```bash
git submodule update --init --recursive
```

### Step 1: Clean Previous Content

Remove the auto-generated content to start fresh:

```bash
rm -rf site/web/content/*
```

### Step 2: Migrate Core Documentation

Copy core documentation files from `site/raw/core/docs/` to `site/web/content/docs/`:

```bash
mkdir -p site/web/content/docs

# Copy README.md as _index.md
cp site/raw/core/docs/README.md site/web/content/docs/_index.md

# Copy all other markdown files
for file in site/raw/core/docs/*.md; do
  filename=$(basename "$file")
  if [ "$filename" != "README.md" ]; then
    cp "$file" site/web/content/docs/$filename
  fi
done
```

### Step 3: Migrate Features Documentation

Migrate the features index:

```bash
mkdir -p site/web/content/features
cp site/raw/features/README.md site/web/content/features/_index.md
```

Then migrate each feature with frontmatter:

```bash
for feature_dir in site/raw/features/*/; do
  if [ -d "$feature_dir" ]; then
    feature_name=$(basename "$feature_dir")
    mkdir -p "site/web/content/features/$feature_name"

    for file in "$feature_dir"/*.md; do
      if [ ! -f "$file" ]; then
        continue
      fi

      filename=$(basename "$file")

      if [ "$filename" = "README.md" ]; then
        # Feature README with frontmatter
        {
          echo "+++"
          echo "bookCollapseSection = true"
          echo "weight = 1"
          echo "+++"
          cat "$file"
        } > "site/web/content/features/$feature_name/_index.md"
      elif [ "$filename" = "CHANGELOG.md" ]; then
        # CHANGELOG without frontmatter
        cp "$file" "site/web/content/features/$feature_name/$filename"
      else
        # Other files with frontmatter
        {
          echo "+++"
          echo "weight = 1"
          echo "+++"
          echo ""
          cat "$file"
        } > "site/web/content/features/$feature_name/$filename"
      fi
    done
  fi
done
```

### Step 4: Migrate Static Assets

Copy images and logos:

```bash
mkdir -p site/web/static/images

# Copy images
if [ -d "site/raw/core/docs/images" ]; then
  cp -r site/raw/core/docs/images/* site/web/static/images/
fi

# Copy logo as favicon
if [ -f "logos/logo.png" ]; then
  cp logos/logo.png site/web/static/favicon.png
fi
```

### Step 5: Start Hugo Server

```bash
cd site/web
hugo server
```

The documentation site will be available at **http://localhost:1313/**

Hugo will watch for changes in `site/web/content/` and automatically rebuild. However, if you edit files in `site/raw/`, you need to re-run the migration steps above.

### Quick Build (Without Server)

To build the static site without running a server:

```bash
cd site/web
hugo --minify
```

Output will be in `site/web/public/`

## Migration Rules

The migration script follows these rules:

### Core Documentation (`site/raw/core/docs/`)
- `README.md` → `content/docs/_index.md` (no frontmatter)
- Other `.md` files → copied as-is (no frontmatter)

### Features Documentation (`site/raw/features/`)
- `features/README.md` → `content/features/_index.md` (no frontmatter)
- Feature `README.md` → `content/features/<name>/_index.md` with frontmatter:
  ```toml
  +++
  bookCollapseSection = true
  weight = 1
  +++
  ```
- `CHANGELOG.md` → copied as-is (no frontmatter)
- Other `.md` files → copied with frontmatter:
  ```toml
  +++
  weight = 1
  +++
  ```

### Static Assets
- `site/raw/core/docs/images/*` → `site/web/static/images/`
- `logos/logo.png` → `site/web/static/favicon.png`

## Hugo Configuration

The Hugo configuration is in `site/web/hugo.toml`:

- **Theme**: Hugo Book
- **Base URL**: `https://docs.firestartr.dev/`
- **BookPortableLinks**: Enabled (allows relative markdown links to work)

## Deployment

When you push to the `main` branch, GitHub Actions automatically:

1. Migrates content from `site/raw/` to `site/web/content/`
2. Builds the Hugo site with minification
3. Deploys to the `deployments` branch
4. GitHub Pages serves the site from the `deployments` branch

## Common Issues

### Theme Not Found

If you see "theme not found" errors:

```bash
git submodule update --init --recursive
```

### Links Not Working

Make sure `BookPortableLinks = true` is set in `hugo.toml` under `[params]`.

### Images Not Displaying

Images should be placed in `site/raw/core/docs/images/` and referenced as:

```markdown
![Alt text](/images/filename.png)
```

## Style Guidelines

- Use clear, concise language
- Include code examples where appropriate
- Use proper markdown formatting
- Document all configuration options
- Provide troubleshooting sections for complex features
- Link to external resources when helpful

## Questions?

For questions or issues, please open an issue on the repository.

Commit message:

docs: add guide to try the generated artifact

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to Firestartr Documentation

This guide explains how to contribute to the Firestartr documentation and test your changes locally.

## Documentation Structure

The documentation is organized as follows:

```
docs/
├── site/
│   ├── raw/                    # SOURCE - Generated from other repositories
│   │   ├── core/               # Core Firestartr documentation
│   │   │   ├── docs/           # Documentation markdown files
│   │   │   ├── crds/           # Custom Resource Definitions (versioned)
│   │   │   └── claims/         # Claims JSON schema
│   │   └── features/           # Individual feature documentation
│   └── web/                    # Hugo static site
│       ├── content/            # Check artifacts from GitHub Actions
│       ├── static/             # Check artifacts from GitHub Actions
│       ├── themes/             # Hugo Book theme (git submodule)
│       └── hugo.toml           # Hugo configuration
└── .github/workflows/
    └── deploy-docs.yml         # Automated deployment workflow
```

## Editing Documentation

### Where to Edit

**Always edit files in `site/raw/`** - never edit files in `site/web/content/` as they are auto-generated.

- **Core documentation**: Edit files in `site/raw/core/docs/`
- **Feature documentation**: Edit files in `site/raw/features/<feature-name>/`

### Documentation Workflow

1. Edit source files in `site/raw/`
2. Migrate content locally (see steps below)
3. Test with Hugo local server
4. Commit and push to main branch
5. GitHub Actions automatically migrates, builds, and deploys

## Testing Documentation Locally

### Prerequisites

Install Hugo extended version:

```bash
# macOS (Homebrew)
brew install hugo

# Linux (Snap)
snap install hugo

# Or download from https://github.com/gohugoio/hugo/releases
```

Verify installation:

```bash
hugo version
# Should show v0.152.2 or later with "extended"
```

### Initialize Git Submodules

The Hugo Book theme is included as a git submodule. Initialize it:

```bash
git submodule update --init --recursive
```

### Step 1: Clean Previous Content

Remove the auto-generated content to start fresh:

```bash
rm -rf site/web/content/*
```

### Step 2: Migrate Core Documentation

Copy core documentation files from `site/raw/core/docs/` to `site/web/content/docs/`:

```bash
mkdir -p site/web/content/docs

# Copy README.md as _index.md
cp site/raw/core/docs/README.md site/web/content/docs/_index.md

# Copy all other markdown files
for file in site/raw/core/docs/*.md; do
  filename=$(basename "$file")
  if [ "$filename" != "README.md" ]; then
    cp "$file" site/web/content/docs/$filename
  fi
done
```

### Step 3: Migrate Features Documentation

Migrate the features index:

```bash
mkdir -p site/web/content/features
cp site/raw/features/README.md site/web/content/features/_index.md
```

Then migrate each feature with frontmatter:

```bash
for feature_dir in site/raw/features/*/; do
  if [ -d "$feature_dir" ]; then
    feature_name=$(basename "$feature_dir")
    mkdir -p "site/web/content/features/$feature_name"

    for file in "$feature_dir"/*.md; do
      if [ ! -f "$file" ]; then
        continue
      fi

      filename=$(basename "$file")

      if [ "$filename" = "README.md" ]; then
        # Feature README with frontmatter
        {
          echo "+++"
          echo "bookCollapseSection = true"
          echo "weight = 1"
          echo "+++"
          cat "$file"
        } > "site/web/content/features/$feature_name/_index.md"
      elif [ "$filename" = "CHANGELOG.md" ]; then
        # CHANGELOG without frontmatter
        cp "$file" "site/web/content/features/$feature_name/$filename"
      else
        # Other files with frontmatter
        {
          echo "+++"
          echo "weight = 1"
          echo "+++"
          echo ""
          cat "$file"
        } > "site/web/content/features/$feature_name/$filename"
      fi
    done
  fi
done
```

### Step 4: Migrate Static Assets

Copy images and logos:

```bash
mkdir -p site/web/static/images

# Copy images
if [ -d "site/raw/core/docs/images" ]; then
  cp -r site/raw/core/docs/images/* site/web/static/images/
fi

# Copy logo as favicon
if [ -f "logos/logo.png" ]; then
  cp logos/logo.png site/web/static/favicon.png
fi
```

### Step 5: Start Hugo Server

```bash
cd site/web
hugo server
```

The documentation site will be available at **http://localhost:1313/**

Hugo will watch for changes in `site/web/content/` and automatically rebuild. However, if you edit files in `site/raw/`, you need to re-run the migration steps above.

### Quick Build (Without Server)

To build the static site without running a server:

```bash
cd site/web
hugo --minify
```

Output will be in `site/web/public/`

## Testing GitHub Actions Build Artifacts

If you want to test the documentation site generated by the GitHub Actions workflow without setting up Hugo locally:

### Step 1: Download the Artifact

1. Go to the `Actions` tab in the repository
2. Click on the workflow run you want to test
3. Scroll down to the "Artifacts" section
4. Download the artifact
5. Extract the downloaded ZIP file

### Step 2: Serve the Static Site

Navigate to the extracted `public` directory and start a local web server:

```bash
cd public
python3 -m http.server 8000
```

### Step 3: View the Site

Open your browser and navigate to **http://localhost:8000/**

You can now browse the documentation site exactly as it will appear after deployment.

## Migration Rules

The migration script follows these rules:

### Core Documentation (`site/raw/core/docs/`)
- `README.md` → `content/docs/_index.md` (no frontmatter)
- Other `.md` files → copied as-is (no frontmatter)

### Features Documentation (`site/raw/features/`)
- `features/README.md` → `content/features/_index.md` (no frontmatter)
- Feature `README.md` → `content/features/<name>/_index.md` with frontmatter:
  ```toml
  +++
  bookCollapseSection = true
  weight = 1
  +++
  ```
- `CHANGELOG.md` → copied as-is (no frontmatter)
- Other `.md` files → copied with frontmatter:
  ```toml
  +++
  weight = 1
  +++
  ```

### Static Assets
- `site/raw/core/docs/images/*` → `site/web/static/images/`
- `logos/logo.png` → `site/web/static/favicon.png`

## Hugo Configuration

The Hugo configuration is in `site/web/hugo.toml`:

- **Theme**: Hugo Book
- **Base URL**: `https://docs.firestartr.dev/`
- **BookPortableLinks**: Enabled (allows relative markdown links to work)

## Deployment

When you push to the `main` branch, GitHub Actions automatically:

1. Migrates content from `site/raw/` to `site/web/content/`
2. Builds the Hugo site with minification
3. Deploys to the `deployments` branch
4. GitHub Pages serves the site from the `deployments` branch

## Common Issues

### Theme Not Found

If you see "theme not found" errors:

```bash
git submodule update --init --recursive
```

### Links Not Working

Make sure `BookPortableLinks = true` is set in `hugo.toml` under `[params]`.

### Images Not Displaying

Images should be placed in `site/raw/core/docs/images/` and referenced as:

```markdown
![Alt text](/images/filename.png)
```

## Style Guidelines

- Use clear, concise language
- Include code examples where appropriate
- Use proper markdown formatting
- Document all configuration options
- Provide troubleshooting sections for complex features
- Link to external resources when helpful

## Questions?

For questions or issues, please open an issue on the repository.
